In the previous video, we looked at the Char
and also the Boolean data type
which was the seventh and eighth primitive data types
that we've covered so far in the course.
And in fact that was the last two
there's only eight primitive data types in Java.
It's now time to have a little recap
briefly of where we are with those data types
but then to discuss a very important data type
that you were using a lot in this course
and in fact anytime you're programming in Java.
So I've got a new project open
called Strings for the code we'll be working on.
So if you're following along, create a new project.
Alright so the eight primitive types
that we worked on previously, of course were Byte
I'll just type this over
so after Byte we had the Short
the Int, I'm putting two backslashes there
sorry two forward slashes to indicate that it's a comment.
The comment is ignored by the Java compiler
and basically just enables us to put some
comments or information that we can actually refer to later.
I've just ignored.
Alright so that were the eight data types
that we've talked about before.
Each of these primitive types
as you found out if you've looked at the previous videos
has got its own style and is used for different purposes.
So the Byte as we found out
can only hold a number in the range of
minus 128 to plus 127, so it's entirely possible
that you'll go years as a Java developer
and not even need to use the Byte ever.
The most common primitive types you'll use
will be an Int, a Double and a Boolean
and you probably from time-to-time
need to use a Long and a Char, but not as often.
And Short and Float as well as Byte that I've mentioned
well these types are used rarely if at all.
Now as you get more experienced in Java
you'll learn to use the right primitive type
for a given computing problem and that's actually
all part of becoming a programmer.
So just to reinforce those eight data types
we've looked at are primitive types
built into the Java programming language.
Now as we go through the course further
you'll find that there's a way to create
your own data types, which in Java are called Classes.
Now there's an entire section in this course on Classes
so I'm not going to go into more detail about Classes here
but what's interesting about them
is that you can combine data types like
perhaps one or more Ints, Doubles, booleans etc
and sort of create sort of like a super data type
which again are called Classes in Java
but more on that when we get to the Classes section.
For now though let's talk about another data type
and that's the String.
So the string is a data type in Java
which is not a primitive type.
It's actually a Class
but it enjoys a bit of favouritism in Java
to make it easy to use than a regular Class.
In other words its treated a little bit differently
and you can treat it differently
than you'd normally treat a Class.
So what is a string?
Well a string is a sequence of characters.
Now if you recall in the case of the Char primitive type
which you can see above
and we discussed that in the previous video
that could contain only a single character
either a regular character or a Unicode character.
A string on the other hand
that can contain a sequence of characters
in fact a large number of characters.
It's technically only limited by the amount
of memory space, heap space in your computer
or the MAX_VALUE of an Int
and if you recall when we're looking at Ints
and their maximum sizes was around 2.14 billion.
So that's a heck of a lot of characters
that could potentially fit in a string.
We'll start the definement, let's go ahead and do that
and we do that by typing String, capital S
and a variable name myString equals
in double quotes the value we'll set, 'This is a string'
so you can see that it's very much
like a primitive type in terms of how we use it.
And let's just print this out
I'm gonna put a message first to say
'myString is equal to' closing double quote plus
and then myString, the variable
and if we run this, you can see the output is
myString is equal to and then what we assign myString to
which is 'This is a string'.
Now we can also append to that string automatically
by using the plus operator
in fact we sort of did something similar on line 15.
So to do that to this myString variable
we can type myString is equal to
myString plus, then double quotes comma
'and this is more', a semicolon
then let's output it, so what we'll do is
we'll just copy the entire line
the output line from line 15 I'll paste them to line 17
and we'll run that again.
So what that's doing there
that's appending the text and the double quotes
on line 16 to the existing contents of myString
and we can see looking at the output
that myString is now equal to
'This is a string comma and this is more
with a period on the end.
So what we're saying is make myString
equal to whatever it currently is
when the programme gets to that point
and this is the code I'm talking about, it's on line 16.
So as of the time it's looking
at the code on to the right of the equal sign
myString is set to this as a string
and we're saying add by the use of the plus operator
that X comma and this is more.
And that's why we're seeing the output
in the output window with the extra output.
Alright another thing you can do
is you can use Unicode characters
so we could continue this example
by typing myString equal myString plus
this time I put a double quotes
and we'll put the \u00A9
which is a code for the copyright symbol.
Let's put the year 2019 and let's copy line 17
to check the output out
so let's see what happens when we've done that.
You can see the output to the right hand side
has now got copyright 2019.
So you can do that as well, you can see that
it's got some versatility, we can use
the Unicode characters and regular characters
and also unlock the Char
we can actually have a significant
amount of characters if we like.
Alright so let's try something different now
let's type in a new string
so I'm going to start on line 20
and I go to type String numberString is equal to
in double quotes I'm gonna type 250.55
and closing double quotes and then a semicolon
then I'm going to type numberString equals
numberString plus in double quotes 49.95
and the semicolon down the line.
I'm gonna add the line to output it
but before I run this
what do you think the answer will be?
Will the two numbers be added together
the 250.55 and 49.95, so in other words
if my math is correct that should be 300
but we see 300 outputed.
Let's actually try running that to see what we get
and you can see that in fact here
we haven't got the number 300, we've got the 250.55
and after that we've got 49.95.
So the 49.95 has been appended
to the end of the 250.55.
Now the reason for that
is that we're not using a numeric type
such as an Int or a Long etc
or even a double for that matter
we're using a text data type, String in this case
and a string treats the text or digits
that you type as text only.
So there's no numerical calculations done and available
so we'll need to convert that to another type
or save it in another type in order to be able
to perform mathematical calculations to it.
So here clearly we can see that
it hasn't done any calculations for us.
So again, a String is dealing with textual data only
and it doesn't treat even numeric numbers
that we've keyed there as numbers
they are also treated as the textual representations.
Now later in the course I'll show you
how you can convert what you think is a number
from a String to a number, but for now
anything you type into a String is a String
and you can see it's treated differently
to a numeric data type, that we saw previously.
Alright so another thing I want to show you
that might surprise you, we're gonna type String
lastString is equal to, 10 in double quotes.
On the next line I'm going to type an Int
or create an Int variable, int myInt
assign that to the value of 50
then on this line, this could be the confusing line
lastString equals lastString plus myInt.
We're gonna output that with by typing
in double quotes lastString is equal to plus lastString.
But firstly notice that on line 25
we're actually adding a numeric data type of Int
to a String and yet we haven't been flagged as any errors
so as far as IntelliJ is concerned
there isn't an error with doing that
so what do you think is gonna happen
when the line 26 is executed
what output are we going to see?
Let's run it and see what we get.
You can see there that lastString is equal to 1050.
So even though we've used an integer data type
as the second part, well in other words
we've appended the integer to the string
the entire thing, lastString
is still configured and set up as a String.
The reason for that is, Java is smart enough here
to say okay I note that the integer you've defined
myInt, on line 24, is an integer
but I also know that you're trying to add it to a String
and of course lastString was defined on line 23 as a String.
So what Java does then is it actually converts
or effectively looks at the contents
of myInt, the value of it
and converts the value, 50 in this case
to a String then appends that to the 10
and that's why we're seeing 1050
as the value of our lastString.
So it isn't a number in the true sense
it's treated purely as text by the computer here
because it knows it's adding that to lastString.
So myInt itself is still an integer variable
but it's for your dish in the appending of the value
to the lastString, that's treated as a String.
And we can continue on in that example
and do something like Double doubleNumber equals 120.47d
and we can do lastString is equal to
lastString plus doubleNumber, then let's print it out.
We'll just take the value here
we'll just take a copy of that line again
paste it, save a bit of time, let's run it again.
You can see here lastString is now equal to 1050
but also the 120.47 which was the decimal version
from our Double data type, has been appended as well.
So it's done exactly the same as the integer
is treated the value as text and appended that
as text to our string variable.
So now what I'm doing here is only a very
elementary way of dealing with Strings
and adding to Strings.
In later lessons, we're gonna go through this
and look at some of the more advanced features of a string
because we can do all sorts of things with it.
It's quite a useful thing
we can delete characters out of a string
we can append characters which we've seen
we can insert characters at specific positions
there's lots of flexibility with strings
but we need to know a bit more about Classes
before we can get into too much detail.
So Strings in Java are immutable.
So what I just said
that you can delete characters out of a string
that's not strictly true
because strings in Java are immutable
and what that means is that
you can't change a String after its created.
Instead what happens is that
a new String gets created for us by Java.
So in the case of this code lastString
doesn't get appended the value of 120.47
and still a new String is created automatically by Java
which consists of the previous value of lastString
plus a textual representation of the double value 120.47.
So the net result is the same
lastString has the right values
however a new String got created
and the old one got discarded from memory
automatically by Java.
Now don't worry if that makes no sense
it will later in the course.
For now I just wanted to point out
that Strings are immutable
and that they will make more sense as you progress.
And just to note that the code that I wrote there
was quite inefficient, so as a result
of a string being created for every operation
appending values like this is inefficient
and generally not recommended.
I'm gonna show you a better way
of doing this in a future video
where we'll discuss something called a StringBuffer
which unlike the String, can be changed.
But you do need an understanding of classes
before we tackle StringBuffers
so we're gonna leave that until later in the course
but I've also shown you this method today
because you will come across code
written in this style I've used in this lecture
using operators like plus to append values to it
so it's useful for you to know
how to do things this way or even know
that that's a way that you wouldn't generally do it.
Alright so from your point of view
you can treat the string
as sort of like a 9th primitive type
however to be completely clear it's not a primitive type
it's a class, but the Java language has set the String
to be used in an easy-to-use way
compared to classes traditionally
which we haven't covered yet
and you will be using a lot of Strings
as we progress through the course
and in general when you're working life as a Java programmer
Alright so time to discuss a few more things
before we end this section.
So we've got operators and operator precedence
to cover in the next few videos.
So let's get started on that in the next video.